People come to me, they don't come to me
for small small goals. They're they want
to be world number one.
>> You hit the New York Times bestseller
list.
>> The book was five years of full-time
writing and research, but I came out of
that with a near mental breakdown. I had
spent my life saving $90,000 in debt.
>> I want to dive into this developing
ourselves as a person and use this
episode as a means to sort of teach
people inner excellence and how they can
perform under pressure and also live a
life of more meaning. What I've seen
with people that are very talented is
that exactly what you said is just next,
[music] next, next next, like let's get
another goal. Let's let's achieve
something else. It's a dangerous trap.
[music] Inner excellence is about
expanding what you believe is possible.
Everything is here to teach me and help
me. It's all working for my good. So,
we're going to go look for those moments
when you're most uncomfortable.
>> Where does ego and sort of
selfcenteredness
and self-confidence interact?
>> Confidence is super helpful, but there's
something even more powerful than
confidence, [music] and that's
I want to start with this book, Inner
Excellence. So, you wrote this book. You
wanted to put together a manual on
mental toughness and performance under
pressure. And the first thing I
highlighted in this book, it's it's not
even on a page number. It's in the
preface here is the quality of your life
is based on three elements. your inner
world of thoughts and feelings, beliefs
and desires, your frame of reference,
mindset from which you see the world and
your relationships. How did you hit on
that?
>> Well, I mean this was the book was 5
years of full-time writing and research.
And so that is a very holistic approach
and that and I think that's what you
need if you want human optimization. We
need to be holistic. We need to get
deeper than just the mind. We need to go
into the heart into the subconscious.
And so that's one of the in the 5 years
of full-time writing and research that
became inner excellence. That was one of
the first things that I realized is that
if you want to really help anybody,
whether you're a counselor, a parent, a
coach, yourself, we need to get to where
your greatest fears are and your
greatest dreams. And that subconscious,
heart, spirit, neuro level is where we
got to get to.
>> Is there a moment in your life where you
realize this or was it this slow sort of
awakening? Well, I think my background
kind of all played into it and and I
think everything that I've been through
has been training me. All the all the
hard times, the really scary times and
low times in my life, God's been
training me. I didn't know it at the
time, but now I can see it much clearer
now. It was not just the five years of
writing the book, but there was all my
experiences and, you know, my mom's
background and community background that
my dad got into with the Hutterites and
my brother and the spiritual background,
all of that. The key realization of the
book seems to be that the pursuit of
extraordinary performance and the
pursuit of the best possible life are
the same thing.
>> Yeah, that was that was really a
life-changing thing for me to realize in
the desert. So, kind of how that
happened was I give away over half my
possessions to go live in a life of
solitude to figure out what to do with
my life. I wanted to find something that
I could devote my life to. And when I
was there, I decided to become a
personal coach to pro baseball players
and teach them how to have peace and
confidence under pressure. And so then I
started to put together this manual for
future clients after my first two
clients did amazing. And what I realized
in the research was that what good is it
if I spend my life making people really
successful? Whether it's winning an
Olympic gold medal or being world number
one or making millions of dollars, if it
doesn't make a difference in their heart
and in the world, if it just makes them
more successful, like that may not even
be a good thing. And then when I found
out that to teach someone how to have
the most poise under the most pressure
is the same path as living the best
possible life, a meaningful fulfilling
life with with amazing experiences and
deepen enriching relationships where
you're learning and growing and making a
difference. It's the same path, a
wholehearted path. When I when I
realized that, that's when everything
changed. That's what inner excellence
is. is to teach someone how to be
wholehearted, how to walk in love and
not fear and develop yourself as a
person and optimize that and become your
true self. And then you're better at
every you're a better athlete, you're a
better parent, better coach, you're more
present, more gracious, more aware. I
want to dive into this developing
ourselves as a person and use this
episode as a a means to sort of teach
people inner excellence and how they can
perform under pressure and also live a
life of more meaning. But before we get
there, I want to talk about the book.
How did the book come about? Let's spend
a beat on this for a second because my
understanding is you wrote this book and
then almost nobody read it.
>> Yeah, that's right. So the book came out
in 2009
and uh I wrote the book because I wanted
to write the best best book ever on
mental toughness and I wanted to use
that as a manual for my clients to use
that that I can give them and say here's
how you train your your mind and your
heart. It worked great for that. It
wasn't a big seller but it worked great
for that. And interesting enough I had
on my phone I I I recommend to all my
clients that they they have these
reminders silent reminders that come up
these affirmations every day throughout
the day. And one of mine was that I'm a
New York Times bestselling author and it
had been 15 years 16 years and so and
that had happened. So after a few years
I took it off. The book was was doing
great for what I wrote it for as this
manual and and for other clients to to
get other clients. So that was amazing
but it wasn't a big seller. And then so
2018 I got the rights from McGra Hill
and then I spent two more years of of uh
part-time maybe 20 hours a week revising
it. So that came out in 2020. The book I
I thought it was going to be 15%
different, but it turned out to be about
85% new stories and same concepts, but
new stories.
>> And then I assume most people found it
the way I did. I was watching the NFC
playoff game and saw AJ Brown on the
sideline reading this book and then that
became the focal point of what everybody
was talking about all of a sudden. Where
were you? What happened there?
>> Yeah. So, I was in Dallas, Texas. Um, I
was there to write to do an
international retreat and uh I'm in my
hotel room. What was amazing about that
week, it was such an intense week for
many reasons. So January 12th was that
Sunday. My mom died January 16th and she
was 91. She had an amazing life, had a
huge impact on my life and taught me so
much. So it was an answer to prayer
because she was suffering. But it was a
very somber week and also kind of a slow
week um in my life and and just it'd
been years of kind of my both parents
died and my sister died and trying to
care for them and things were slow and
business was slow and I actually didn't
pay off my credit cards in January. I
had money in investments but I didn't
have any in my checking and I look up at
the skyscraper in downtown Dallas that
Sunday afternoon and and I had just
written a book called The Best Possible
Life: How to Live with Deep Contempt,
Joy, and Confidence No Matter What. It's
a a a much smaller, easier book to read
and on the spiritual life and kind of a
summary of inner excellence. And so that
book had just come out and I remember
looking at the skyscraper that afternoon
and and the thought came to me was Jim,
would you rather own that skyscraper for
whatever hundreds of millions of dollars
it's worth or would you rather have
written the book the best possible life?
And I thought, no, I wouldn't trade it
for hundreds of millions of dollars. And
so I thought, well, at least you got
that. That's pretty cool. And then a
couple hours later, everything changed.
My whole life changed. I'm watching Penn
State play Notre Dame, a bowl game that
had already happened. I look at my phone
and I see all these texts and I thought
my mom died because why all the texts?
And then obviously someone said, "You
need to turn on the the Eagles game."
And so I turn it on and I see it. And
that's when I found out with the rest of
the world that that he was reading the
book, you know, bringing the book to
every game, reading it before games to
get centered and reading it after every
drive. I saw him with a picture of him
with a book on the sidelines a month
before, but I had no context. And so,
yeah, that's when the barrage of
interview requests and and everything
started happening.
>> It's interesting to me in a couple
things. I want to go back just for a
second. One of your affirmations was to
be a New York Times bestselling author.
That sounds like an outcome.
>> The way I think about this is so I get
paid to help people achieve outcomes.
They don't come to me to feel better or
have a more spiritual life. as far as my
the way I've been paid the last 10 20
years, but we do it through a a
spiritual approach. When I say spirit, a
heartfocused much deeper approach than
the transactional world that we live in.
And so I have what I call third world
goals. I use I call the the world that
we live in of of results and
circumstances the first world. And the
second world is your inner world. And
then the first world is the unseen world
that's uh eternal and has every good
thing like love, joy, peace, inner inner
strength, mental toughness. And so the
third world of results and
circumstances, I have goals there. Like
one goal was to be a New York Times
bestselling author. But the crucial
thing is those are just temporary things
that I don't even know if it's good for
me. I mean there's we all have goals,
but are they good for you? Are they the
best thing for you? We don't even know
if they're good for you. And so I try to
hold them loosely knowing that that
yeah, I have these desires and goals,
but they're nothing compared to who I'm
becoming. And uh to share God's good
news with the world, his love, wisdom,
and courage. I that's my purpose. And
and that's what God told me on day
three. I was getting overwhelmed and
stressed and like, "Oh my gosh, what is
happening?" And God was like, "Tim, you
don't have to stress out. You didn't do
this. I'm I'm doing it. I did it. And
your purpose doesn't change." And so
that was a big relief was like, "Okay, I
don't have to stress out about all this
stuff and and I'm just going to continue
to do what I do." And
>> how did you feel after you made so your
goal came true? You hit the New York
Times bestseller list. Not only did you
hit it, you were number one, you sold
100,000 or more copies of the book,
which is just a runaway success by any
measure of any book ever. And it's sort
of like this dream, right? Like you
wrote this book, you went to the desert,
you put your head down, and then nothing
happened. And then one day suddenly
somebody recognized how amazing this
work was. Did that feel satisfying to
you or did it feel empty?
>> Very very surreal and extremely
incredible. It it it definitely didn't
feel empty. It wasn't like oh now I'm
somebody. It felt amazing because it was
like God and I are doing something
together. That's what was amazing. And
so the most exciting part about all of
this is is the work we're doing in inner
city Philly specifically with Shane
Clayborn and potentially with with Bill
Strickland's group. Um he's author of a
book called Make the Impossible
Possible. He's got 17 centers around the
world that provide job training skills
and and arts and crafts for inner city
um youth and and adults. And so that's
been the most exciting thing about this
and and and to feel like wow, God chose
me to share this message. It's the most
amazing thing. And I'm just a messenger.
It's like that first week there was so
much talk about me. Like I'll give you
an example. I'm I'm in Philadelphia. I'm
going to go to the next game um against
the Rams, the snow game, and I'm in the
elevator. I see all these Eagle fans
wearing all their gear. I said, "Hey, I
heard one of your players was reading a
book on the sideline. Is this true?" And
they said, "Oh, yeah, yeah." And I was
like, "Um, what's the name of the book?"
And they're like, "Oh, Interex." I said,
"Well, is it any good?" They're like, "I
don't know. We haven't read it." But the
guy, he he went from uh 500,000 or
whatever to number one. And I was like,
really? And uh so now we're getting out
of the elevator and walking away. And uh
and they're like, "Do you know how much
money that guy made?" And and I said,
"Well, um whoever that guy is, I sure
hope he does something good with that
money."
>> The reason I was starting to get
overwhelmed on day three looking at all
the sales and everything that's
happening because it was I started to
think about myself, Jim, don't screw
this up. and and this is something that
I'm doing. But then God said, "This is
not something that you're doing or did."
And then so that was just this huge
relief. It's not a Jim Murphy thing. I'm
just a lowly messenger.
>> When you tell me that story, I kind of
feel bad, not for you, but for myself.
And I'll put this in perspective. And
maybe this is self-centeredness. And you
know, my friend Brent Bashure has this
idea of clean fuel versus dirty fuel.
And how are you powered? And your fuel
sounds very clean. It's purpose- driven.
It's meaningful. And my fuel is more a
mix. It's dirty. It's a chip on my
shoulder. It's I also hit the New York
Times bestselling list. But the first
thought that I had was not positive. It
was I remembered a comment on an article
in the New York Times from 2018
saying, you know, I hope Mr. Parish is
enjoying his 15 minutes of fame. And to
me, that's more of a dirty fuel. And
I've been thinking about a lot about
clean fuel versus dirty fuel and
motivation lately. And the people that I
admire a lot is Tom Brady. And you know,
he's got a mixture of fuel. It sounds
like, you know, there's definitely a
chip on his shoulder from Michigan
driving him and pushing him. And what I
find with the dirty fuel, if you will,
at least for certain personality types,
myself included, is it just never burns
out. Like it never expires. I remember
things that my grade nine teacher told
me, you know, back in the day. They
don't do this anymore, but they used to
write what they actually think. And she
wrote in my report card that went home
to my parents like, "Shane will be lucky
to graduate high school." [snorts]
>> And I like still think about that. Every
like few weeks that pops in my head.
>> What's your reaction to that?
>> We're all human. And so our greatest
need is for love and and acceptance. And
so we all have a mind that's that's
always threatened, always comparing, and
never satisfied. the the part of the
mind I call the ego. And so it's
something that as humans we're always
battling with. The ego says if you're
more successful, you're going to get
what you want most. It doesn't say this
out loud or or in certain words, but
it's that's what it's always implying is
if you're successful, you're going to
get what you want most, which is that
love and connection. If you sell more
books or get more followers or more
money or more promotions, you're going
to get this thing that you need most.
But the flip side is if you fail, you're
gonna not only are you not going to get
that, you're going to get the opposite.
You're going to get rejected. And so
this is always something that every
human battles. And I I try never to tell
anyone what to do as a coach or a
friend. What I try to do is help people
clarify what they want most and help
them get it. Because I know that if you
come to me and you want to be world
number one in a sport, I know that's not
what you really want. I know because I
was in the same boat. I I wanted to be a
superstar major league baseball player
or NFL player or NBA and I thought that
was the best possible life was to make
millions of dollars and be rich and
famous and have every guy want to be me
and every girl want to be with me.
That's the best possible life. I'm going
to live it. And so I obsessed about
that. But what I've learned since then
in in the five years of writing and
researching the book is that what I've
always really wanted is to feel fully
alive. I had a single story for my life.
That story was if you get this this
American dream where you're you're uh
hitting home runs in the big leagues and
on the cover of magazines, that's the
best possible life and that's the life
meant for you. And of course, I played
five years in the minors and I did not
get that life and I was completely
devastated. And so what I want people to
do is I want their fuel, as you kind of
you alluded to a little bit, I want
their fuel to be powerful, empowering. I
want them to like Tom Brady the most
successful potentially football player
ever and he wins a few Super Bowls and
he's he says, "God, is that it?" In
other words, reaching the very top like
like uh Michael Phelps 231 gold medals
and feeling empty. It's it's very very
common because if that's your god and
baseball was my god when I say god that
the thing that you love most and fear
most of losing you're only as stable as
what whatever you're worshiping like
David Foster Wallace told us everyone
has a god there's no atheists everyone
worships something there's something at
the top in your of your heart and that's
your god and and for me it was it was um
being this superstar and you know I lost
it and lost everything and so I was
stable as as it was and so in other
words when I didn't have a good season.
I didn't want people to tell others that
I was a pro baseball player because I
was unstable. And so interactive is say,
"Hey, let's go for what's most
empowering to fuel your life and and
specifically the control center of your
life, your heart."
>> Are you struggling to manage your
projects at work using lots of different
tools [music] for communication, task
management, and scheduling doesn't have
to be this [music] hard. Base Camp is
the refreshingly straightforward,
reliable project management platform.
[music]
It's designed for small and growing
businesses, so there's none of the
complexity you get with software
designed for enterprises. Complexity
kills momentum. Base Camp clears the
path so [music] your team can actually
move. Do away with scattered emails,
endless meetings, [music] and missed
deadlines. With Base Camp, everything
lives in one place. To-do lists, message
boards, chat [music] conversations,
scheduling, and documents. When
information is scattered, attention
[music] is too. Base Camp brings both
back together. Basecam's intuitive
design ensures that everyone knows
what's happening, who's responsible, and
what's coming next. My head of
operations swears by this platform,
[music]
and is the first person to suggest it to
anyone. If you need another decorated
referral, you should call her. Whether
you're a small team or a growing
business, [music] Base Camp scales with
you. Stop struggling, start making
progress, get somewhere with Basecamp.
Sign up for free at basecamp.com.
The holidays are here. If you're
searching for a truly meaningful gift
for someone you care about or maybe for
yourself, I might just have the perfect
idea. Meet Remarkable, the paper [music]
tablet. We're all glued to screens that
demand our constant attention. But
Remarkable is a different kind of
screen. It's an elegantly designed,
distraction-free paper tablet built to
help you think better and focus deeper.
It has the simplicity and feel of
writing on paper, but with the power of
technology like organizing all your
notes and ideas into one place and even
converting your handwriting into type
text. With Remarkable, there are no
apps, no social media, and no
notifications, just pure uninterrupted
focus. Choose the device that fits your
needs. the original black and white
remarkable 2, the advanced color display
of Remarkable Paper Pro, or the new
portable Remarkable Paper Pro Move. This
holiday season, give the gift of being
[music] present. Give the gift of focus.
Find the perfect distractionfree paper
tablet at remarkable.com.
It's a really interesting notion to me
because it's sort of contrary to
everything I've ever been brought up
with. And that was part of the appeal to
this book is I like reading things that
challenge my my worldview or my way of
thinking. And you know, I my background
is sort of an intelligence agency and
then starting a business and you know,
you you set goals, you achieve them,
then you forget about them like 30
seconds later and you're on to the next
goal. And the fire inside me, you know,
I don't know if it continues to burn,
but it's burned pretty hard for 20ome
years. I would imagine I'm very similar
to most of the athletes you've worked
with in terms of like how far this has
gotten me but maybe it doesn't get me
and maybe failure and you know I've
failed million well millions of times I
mean my failures are public you know
everybody watches them uh everybody sees
them and in my mind you learn from that
and you just move on you let it go like
you don't hold on or attach to it but
you do the same with success so the
variance between sort of like happiness
and sadness is like so narrow because
it's like you never get too happy and
you never get too sad and you just sort
of like stoically go forward.
>> What I've seen with people that are very
talented like yourself is that exactly
what you said is just next next like
let's get another goal let's achieve
something else. It's it's really like
productivity is is really really
important uh because achievement is is
the whole the end goal. It's a dangerous
trap. The more talent you have, the more
likely that you can get in this trap.
And the trap is I set a goal, I work at
it, I get a result, and then I process
that result in my mind. Do I like it?
Was it good or bad? Did I win or lose?
And then after I process it in my mind,
I'm going to get a feeling. And that
feeling is going to be if I got what I
wanted, it's going to be positive but
temporary. If I didn't get what I
wanted, it's going to be negative. And
that's going to impact my beliefs
because beliefs are feelings. And then
I'm going to be like that belief will be
oh maybe I can achieve my dreams or
maybe I won't. But because if you're
talented now what are you gonna do? It's
another goal. And so say you achieve the
first one you're like okay maybe I can.
You process in your mind yeah I can do
these things and and I'm going to be
somebody and I'm going to achieve these
things. You set another higher goal and
then you don't get it. Then you process
in your mind like oh this sucks. So you
get a negative feeling impacts your
belief maybe I can't do this. And but
the the more talented you are, the more
tears you're going to get when you do
achieve these things because they're
going to be bigger than most people. And
that sucks you in to just this cycle of
I just got to keep achieving. If I can
feel okay about myself if I keep
achieving. It's like Jerry Seinfeld.
He's uh maybe the most famous successful
comedian ever. And uh he said, you know,
why do I work? He's like, well, I I keep
working because that's the only way I
can kind of really feel. I don't
remember the words he he used exactly
but it was it's the same story I hear
over and over and over like when people
retire they lose their purpose because
the work in essence kept them distracted
>> and busyness is one of the biggest
things that we do so we don't have to
get deeper and face our fears and and
look at life at a deeper level and that
deeper level is what you alluded to in
the very beginning we're created for
relationship and when you understand
that you're either walking in love or
fear then love is is this willingness to
sacrifice for others and fear is this
these walls that we naturally build.
It's this self-centerness that's
inherent in human nature that um that is
important to take care of ourselves and
and be safe, but also we build these
walls that imprison us. So that's why
it's it's so important to think deeper
deeper about your life and and get out
of that busyness, go into solitude and
really think why do I want these goals
that I have and what is at the end that
I that I want to look back on my life
and and have the busyiness brought to
mind something that I observed many
years ago with certain people and they
would dive into work as a means of
escape. They were escaping their family
and their life that they've created and
it's the same as you know vacation. And
I often have these conversations with
people and they're like, "Oh, I can't
wait to go on vacation." And I'm like,
"Why?" You know, for me, it's like, "Why
do you have a life that you've built
that you want to escape?" And so that
part I find interesting. And how do how
do you help somebody who's avoiding
something? And I did this when I first
got divorced. I mean, I avoided dealing
with what I needed to process and what I
needed to look at and how I needed to go
through this. And the way that I did
that was diving into work. And so I
notice it in other people as well. How
do you take somebody who's avoiding
something like that? And you know the
avoidance could be I'm avoiding I've
created this life that either I feel I
have to work to achieve for my family or
I just don't like my life and I I can't
acknowledge and I'm unconsciously like
diving into work as a means of avoiding
going home and avoiding spending time
with my kids and my family. was
interesting you mentioned vacation
because the second you said vacation
that's the exact same thing I was
thinking about. I wrote an article
called how to be on vacation and what
I've experienced most people it's
actually it's interesting so two years
ago I had a friend of mine and his his
wife had just died he invited me to be
to go sailing with him in French
Polynesia and um for two weeks and my
first thought was I don't go on vacation
but then I started thinking about it was
going to be him and his son who had just
lost his mom and I thought you know
maybe I could go and be something
positive in their lives but this this
thing about vacation the article how to
be on vacation is the idea that most
people go on vacation to escape their
lives. Like you said, they're what they
the common thing is I'm going to go on
vacation. I don't want to think about
work. Let's not talk about work. Let's
not talk about anything back home. We're
just going to relax. That's a very
common idea, right? And it's it's kind
of like escaping your life. And like you
said, why do you why do you have a life
that you want to escape from? So the
gist of the article is rather than going
to escape your life on vacation, the
best vacation is one where you go to
enhance your life. Well, how do you do
that? Well, first of all, we need we
need to to stop all the busyiness. So,
stop all the thinking and all the doing
and and uh stop all that for a day or
two and then think deeply about your
life purpose and why you're here on this
earth and how can you move towards that
when you go back to your regular life.
There's a question that I like to ask at
the end of every year is what good
reason do you have to not change every
single thing in your life? Because
obviously if you don't have a good
reason then why aren't you changing it?
And that to me that question says you
should look at every single thing that
you're doing and don't um just
re-evaluate it. Is this line up with my
purpose? Mo most people don't have a
clear purpose. So first of all we need
to have a clear purpose for your life.
Otherwise, you're going to get so
distracted and so busy because you can't
it's too hard to sit with yourself and
your thoughts.
>> What's your purpose?
>> My purpose is to share God's love,
wisdom, and courage with with the world
or with athletes and leaders around the
world.
>> How did you find religion?
>> It's interesting you say religion. I
grew up in my mom is full Japanese. Her
family became a Christian family when
her father was dying. And well, it it
kind of started with with um I talked
about this in the book with with the
samurai and how my great
greatgrandfather
his father was a samurai. When the
samurai era ended, he became an
alcoholic because he lost all his power.
And so his son started to think about
what is the meaning of life and he
realized that he wanted to live a life
where he empowered others instead of
having power over others. And that kind
of changed the trajectory of my life,
you know, obviously my mom's life. And
so that was the big thing. And also my
dad, he grew up strictly Catholic but
without a lot of love. And then he got
injured and was in the hospital and
someone prayed for him and he got healed
right away. And so he's like, "Whoa, I
need to find out about this God." And so
that's kind of the journey that that
happened for us. My journey was was I I
believed in God my whole life. But my
life greatly changed when I met this
homeless harpist in in downtown Denver
in 2010 cuz I I spent 5 years full-time
writing in the writing inner excellence,
50 to 60 hours a week. But I came out of
that with a near mental breakdown. I had
spent my life savings $90,000 in debt.
There came a point where I was speaking
to these these high schools in Denver,
Colorado. I was thinking, "Okay, yeah,
the book is in bookstores around the
world. That's great, but you've got no
money to hire someone to market the
book. You don't know how to do
marketing, and you don't like promoting
yourselves. This is not a good marketing
plan. If no one hears about the book, no
one's going to buy the book. If no one
buys the book, then Barnes & Noble will
pull it off the shelves and 5 years of
full-time work is going to go down the
drain plus all that money. And I just
could not see how that was not going to
happen.
>> And effectively that did happen.
Correct.
>> The Barnes & Noble pulling off the
shelves.
>> Yeah. Like it didn't
>> eventually um I don't I don't remember
how long it was on the shelves. It it
didn't happen in a matter of weeks.
After a while, they they pulled it. I
was spiraling. And and when you isolate
yourself, we're created for
relationship. And when you isolate
yourself and have no one to tell you the
truth about who you are and what's
possible for you, then then you can
start to really spiral like I was. So I
called my friend Ricky Ricky Scruggs. I
said, "Hey, tell me what to do." And he
said, "Find a homeless Christian and
help him." And so I I find this homeless
harpist around the corner, this guy
playing a full-sized harp. Really
strange. I listened to him play the
music. I look at my wallet. I had $100.
So I must have taken a cash advance out.
Most of my credit cards were maxed out.
And so I took all the money and I I gave
it to him and and I leave. I go back to
where I stand and run on the treadmill
to try and breathe. I come back to that
same area in Denver. I'm sitting in the
Starbucks just staring off into the
abyss. So much anxiety. And the homeless
harpist walks past me, stops in his
tracks and says, "Are you the guy that
gave me that money?" When I was writing
the book, I asked this girl from my
church. I said, "Can you read this book
and make sure it lines up with the Bible
because I want to make sure it's filled
with wisdom. It has no falsehoods in
it." And she reads Interex and she says,
"Have you ever heard of the word Zoe?"
And she said, "I read your book. Have
you ever heard of the word Zoe?" I said,
"No." actually said it's a a Greek word
that means life. It's in the Bible a
lot. It means fullness of life. I said
yes, that's what this book is about. My
whole life I've obsessed about these
transactions of be about being
successful when what I've always really
wanted was to feel fully alive. So I
started to revolve my book around
pursuing fullness of life and letting
everything else be added to you. And so
I'm in the Starbucks and this guy, the
homeless guy, he left and he came back
and he gave me a bracelet that he made
and a card and a box of chocolates. And
I open up the card and it said, "Thank
you so much for caring for me. love Zoe.
His name was Zoe.
>> I said, "Do you know what your name
means?" And he said, "No." I said, "It
means absolute fullness of life. I've
studied that for five years. I just
wrote a book about it." Grabbed a book
and I wrote Dear Zoe, thank you so much
for sharing your beautiful music with me
today. You don't know what that meant to
me. Love, Jim. I give it to him. I never
see him again. And that was the start of
a complete transformation in my life.
April 1st, about 6 weeks later, I walk
into this guy's house. A friend of a
friend starts to tell me about my life.
I'd never met him before. And uh it was
really strange. And then this gal in the
house, I'd never met her before. She
draws a picture of a kite, hands it to
me. He says, "What's wrong with this
picture?" And I said, "Well, your kite
doesn't have a string." And and she
said, "Yeah, that kite is you." And I
had never even met her before. And so I
was like, "What is happening here?" And
so they invited me to a Bible study that
night. Like I believe in God, but I was
just so lost. And like I said, I had
isolated myself. And then that night, I
felt God saying, "There's nothing you've
ever done or would ever could ever do
would change how much I love you." And I
felt like I had the weight of the world
on my shoulders. Had a million things to
do. It all had to be done yesterday. I
didn't know how to do it. And that
weight of the the world fell off my
shoulders that night.
>> Did it fall off your shoulders because
you're letting go to like a higher
power.
>> Yeah. I surrendered my I said, "God,
I'll do whatever you want. Just tell me
what to do. I I'll I'll move to Nepal.
I'll give away all my possessions, live
in an orphanage or whatever. Volunteer
the rest of my life. Just tell me what
to do. I just don't want this anxiety
anymore."
>> Isn't that the key to 12step programs,
too? Like,
>> yeah. Yeah. Step three is surrender your
will and your life over to God as you
understand him. Yeah. So that's why I
mean 12step program has changed millions
of lives all over the world and it's
because I think it's so successful
because it realizes that the ego that
part of our mind that's always
threatened always comparing never
satisfied is our biggest challenge and
surrender is is is so hard especially
when you're talented but at that moment
I felt like I had nothing and so to
surrender nothing is is much easier than
to surrender a lot you got a successful
life it's very hard to surrender but
that's the key surrender under your
little little power for the power of the
universe.
>> Where does ego and sort of
selfcenteredness
and self-confidence interact?
>> Yeah, that's a great question because
what happens to most most people,
especially young athletes, is they have
this confusion like I know that for me
to achieve my goals in sports, I need to
be confident. And so, does that mean I
need to talk about myself? Do I need to
be brash and boastful? I had this great
conversation with a major league golf
star a year and a half ago. I said, "Pro
althletes, they come to me because they
want confidence." And that's great.
Confidence is super helpful, but there's
something even more powerful than
confidence, and that's being fully
present. I said, "If you have two
athletes that are or performers that are
the same talent, I'll take the fully
present person over the fully confident
one every single time because when
you're confident, you can get careless."
And just look at how many times someone
that's that's super confident goes into
a performance and they don't perform
great. It's it's pretty common, but it's
way less common if you're fully present.
And so this major league allstar told
me, he said, "I've experienced the same
thing. And when I'm pitching and I'm in
the bullpen and getting warmed up, and
if I'm not dialed in, then my confidence
isn't super high." But so then I have
this conversation with myself. I say,
"You look, I don't care what your
outcome is. You can walk 10 guys. it
doesn't matter but you are going to be
present out there. And he said on those
days a lot of times I perform better
than I did when I was fully confident.
>> What does it mean to be present?
>> That's a great question because a lot of
people they take it they don't go far
enough. They just like just don't think
about anything but what you can see or
be where your feet are. And that's such
a limiting view for me. It's super
important if you're a coach to explain
what this is. What is what does it mean?
And so what we're going for is this
sense of freedom. this sense that
anything is possible. This heightened
awareness and to get that freedom, what
I call this flow of resonance where
you're in sync with you just feel really
connected, grounded, centered. There's
no concern for self. Imagine that you're
you see the greatest piece of art ever
you've ever seen. Or maybe that art is
is the Grand Canyon or rainbow or a
great book or movie, whatever it is, but
you're enraptured. you're totally caught
up in it. Are you concerned about
yourself? Are you self-conscious? What
what are people thinking about me? What
if I don't do this right? There's no
thoughts of self when you're in that
moment. And that's when we're at our
best. There's no self. It's as Tim
Keller says, self forgetful. And that's
why selfless is fearless. There's fear
is a self in general. It's a
self-centered future thing. What will
happen to me next after I do this
performance? After I perform, play the
violin, give this talk, what will
happen? What will people think? It's a
but if there's no concern for self then
there's freedom and freedom was one of
the biggest things that that are lacking
in performance today.
>> There's a book written a while back
called the courage to be disliked. One
of the key messages that I took away
from that book was that by default a lot
of people just organize their lives to
avoid criticism. They don't say what
they actually think. They're worried
about how they look. They don't want to
look like an idiot. So they don't try
something because they don't try
something. They don't fail. But they
also don't sort of succeed and push
society forward.
>> Yeah, for sure.
>> What's your reaction to that?
>> Oh, that's super super common. The the
greatest resource other than love and
wisdom is courage because we can all
have it. Love is hard to sacrifice
yourself. And wisdom is is it takes a
lot of study and surrender. Courage.
Every single person on the planet can
have courage. And that's what I found is
the most common amongst the highest
performers in anything. They may not
have a lot of wisdom or love, but they
have courage. And that's business,
sports, music, anything. And what I mean
by that is they're willing to face their
fears. They're willing to look foolish.
They're willing to fail. They're willing
to be judged. And I always have whenever
I work with a client, people come to me,
they don't come to me for small small
goals. They're they want to be world
number one or win the world
championship, Olympic gold medal. And so
I tell them, I say, "Okay, so this
journey that that you're telling me you
want, it's like climbing a mountain. As
you climb, and generally when we start,
we're going to go pretty fast and and
you may ascend pretty fast. But what's
going to happen is is you're going to
get more exposed. There's going to be a
lot more people looking at you and
talking about you. And then you may
fall. And if you fall, you're going to
fall farther than you've fallen before.
>> And that means the judgment is going to
be stronger. If you're not willing to do
that, then don't pick that goal. But if
you want to achieve that goal that
you're telling me you want, now you have
to be willing to fail in a great way and
be judged mercilessly. But it's no
problem if you don't want that goal.
Pick a smaller goal. That's fine.
>> How do we teach people to have courage
or self-confidence to to take that
space? Like it
>> that's the selflessness. That's that's
the master of the ego. That's the
willingness to look foolish and and
understand. So here's how I'll give you
an example. So I was at this playoff um
PJ tour playoff in this in practice
round and the golfer that I was with
they're playing $100 a birdie and the
other two golfers birdie the first two
holes. Now he's behind. He has a short
birdie putt in the third hole and he
missed it and he said it was a short one
and he said he was nervous and I said
you missed that because of your ego and
he said what do you mean? I said would
you have missed that in in practice um
at your home course? He said probably
not. And I said, "Yeah, you were
thinking about them and you were
concerned what they would think and you
really did not want to miss this in
front of them. And that's what caused
the nervousness and the tension that
caused you to miss." Whenever you're in
that moment when you're nervous and you
really want something, obviously the
best performance comes when you have
freedom. But it's easy to get attached
to that because you're like thinking,
"Okay, this is really important." And so
we get attached to it and have tension.
So what you can do is ask yourself, what
do I want more in this moment? to be
successful right here this one time or
to get better at these moments. In other
words, to master my ego, to not be so
caught up in what people think. So, what
happens to most people is that they come
to these points in their lives where
they're really uncomfortable. Maybe
they're giving a speech or playing
pingpong in front of a bunch of people.
It doesn't matter what it is. You if
you're nervous and other people are
watching, they come to those moments
where they're really uncomfortable and
they back away because they're too
uncomfortable. They're too afraid of of
looking foolish in front of others.
Whereas the most successful people,
they're willing to look foolish. They're
willing to make mistakes. And so I think
a lot of people know that, but how do we
get there? And so in that moment, it's
ask it's realizing that when I'm the
most uncomfortable, that's the moment
that's the key for you. And it's it's
principle number one for inner
excellence. Everything is here to teach
me and help me. It's all working for my
good. So we're going to go look for
those moments when you're most
uncomfortable and and say and remind
yourself, this is my teacher. And inner
excellence is about expanding what you
believe is possible. There's three
pillars of inner excellence. Belief,
freedom, and focus. To be fully engaged
in the moment, have freedom to play like
a child and and expand what you believe
is possible to become to do things
you've never done and become someone
you've never been. And to expand what
you believe is possible. Kind of that
crucial pillar is we need to find those
moments where we're uncomfortable and we
need to embrace that moment. And the way
we do it is we understand that the key
thing here is not the outcome. But it's
my willingness to be in this moment and
not back away. It doesn't matter if you
fail horribly. You do that 10 times and
fail horribly 10 times. Eventually
you're going to get comfortable in those
moments and then your skills will be
able to match and and break through. But
people don't break through because they
come to those moments and they shy away.
I mean this is we've all done it. I've
done it way too many times. What do you
struggle with today in relation to that?
Anything?
>> Well, it's the same thing everyone
struggles with when I come to those
moments. I'm like, "Oh, I'm so
uncomfortable right now." And then I
sometimes I've forgotten. It's like I
had this conversation with my spiritual
mentor, um, Nick Osborne, and he said,
"What God does is he gives you a jacket
that's two sizes too big." And that's
what a loving parent does when you're
four or five years old. You don't buy
them a jacket that's perfectly fit
because they're going to grow out of it
too fast. So they're going to the
parents going to buy them a jacket
that's a little bit too big, right? So
they can grow into it. And he said,
"That's what God does. He gives you this
jacket that's too big." And then you put
it on, you're like, "Whoa, this is not
good. This is not right. This doesn't
feel right. What's happen?" And that's
what I felt so much. It's like, "Okay,
this is not okay. What's happening? I
don't I don't get it. This is
uncomfortable." But God did that
intentionally. He's doing that
intentionally because that's where you
need to self-reliance is the biggest
problem that I face. And because I've
got very little power. I've got very
little ability. I've I've only seen the
world through this little lens that I've
I want to be able to see all of reality.
And so to do that, I need to surrender
my little power.
>> Is part of this reframing failure into
there's no such thing as failure. It's
just it's not a verdict. It's like data.
>> Yeah. Redefining success and failure for
sure. Like the Hall of Fame linebacker
Brian Erlocker told me that I asked him,
"What is the difference between you and
the best performers that you've ever in
NFL that you've ever competed against?"
and he said, "Most NFL players, they
make a mistake and they get tentative.
>> I make a mistake and I don't get
tentative." And so that's that's that
courage. That's that willingness to
fail. That's that relentlessness that's
needed.
>> So that's what happens. I mean, it
happens with people too. Like if you
give a talk at work and you know it
doesn't go quite right, it's in your
head the next time you do it. So you're
less likely to be successful in a way.
But the counterbalance to that would be
okay. Well, what do we do? we do more
preparation. We, you know, we go through
our mistake. We reflect on it. We learn
from it. And then we sort of like let go
of it and move on so we don't make the
same mistake again.
>> Yeah. So failure that's all um obviously
big part of it and you know there's one
of the principles the presupposition is
there's no failure only feedback. It's
the emotional part is is the the issue.
If there's no emotional aspect to it
then then you know what does it matter
if you fail? And the emotional part is
the self-centeredness.
>> What happens with self-centerness is
that I need to be thinking about my life
in order to be just to be safe. I got to
look both ways when I cross the street
and feed myself and do all these things.
But the problem is when I think about
myself, my subconscious, which is
designed to protect me, reminds me of
all the potential dangers and all my
mistakes. And that that uh um discomfort
causes me to think want I want to feel
better about myself. And so I would
compare myself to others. But then
there's always someone that has more or
better things
>> and so then I feel insecure and so that
leads towards fear. This this thinking
about myself leads towards fear. How
much do you think the modern world has
really played with that comparison? It
used to be like I I'm just picturing you
go back to like 1920s, 1930s. It's like
your your reference for comparison was
basically like your street maybe your
town. People lived reasonably within the
same socioeconomic status. George or
Beth might have got a new car, but by
and large everybody's sort of in the
same boat. But now we live in a world
where you flip open Instagram and these
celebrities who are flying on private
jets or people like you remember the
Scrooge McDuck thing. They're like
they're swimming in their money or
rappers burning sort of money on videos.
And how much does that mess with us?
>> Oh, it's huge. It's huge. Yeah, it's
it's very very difficult now. 24/7
comparison and you can you can see what
anyone's doing all over the world now.
It creates anxieties of mind with too
many thoughts from too many concerns and
that's what it brings. It's just way too
many thought. We need if you want to be
good at anything for a long period of
time. We need to have way less thoughts
and even way less breaths. One of the
things that stood out to me, you know,
when I when I thought about this before
reading your book, and I'm still mulling
this over, so this conversation is part
of my processing. I was like, "Oh, I
don't know if that's really bad." On an
individual level, it's probably bad.
It's bad for mental health, you know,
for Shane or for Jim. Uh, but on a
society level, it actually results in
really good outcomes because it
motivates Jim or it motivates Shane to
work harder, to push more, to challenge
more, to be more aggressive, to push our
limits.
>> You're talking about seeing what
everyone else is doing. That whole
>> connected. Well, it, you know, I
wouldn't say envy cuz I I don't
necessarily think it's envy, but like
wanting more for yourself and, you know,
the comparison is part of wanting more.
It's like, well, somebody has this thing
and, you know, I want this thing. It's
not because you want this thing as an
individual. Like, you don't even think
about it. It's like somebody's got a
Rolex and all of a sudden you want a
Rolex. It's like, well, no, your watch
tells time and the Rolex isn't going to
do anything for you other than, you
know, 30 grand or whatever it is. Rolex,
if you're listening, I'll take any watch
you want to send me, but I use a
Bremont. But like that drives the world
forward in a way. Do you know what I
mean? Like, and maybe I'm wrong about
those.
>> I think that's very well said. that
drives the world forward in many ways.
But also, so there's the benefit of
technology. Someone has an idea in China
and we can see it right away in America.
The ability to be more productive and
efficient and and achieve more is so
much higher now. So that's amazing.
>> But it comes at a cost,
>> but it comes at a huge cost.
>> And the cost is individual, but the
benefits are largely societable.
>> Well, look at pornography now.
Pornography is everywhere. It wasn't
like before the internet. It wasn't
everywhere. You had to get it from a
magazine. This negative thing now is
infiltrated every single place because
of technologies. Technology can really
help with productivity, but it can
really spread evil fast. It can spread
conspiracy theories and and uh negative
ideas and falsehoods.
>> Yeah, I think about that a lot. Right.
in terms of things that spread or things
that cause emotional reactions and we
subconsciously get programmed to to word
things. If if we're going for likes or
we're going for reach or you know we
take any sort of selfworth in that then
we become we basically become an agent
of the algorithm if you will and we end
up unconsciously I don't think it's
conscious for most people some people it
probably is cuz I don't think most
people are malicious but we feed into
that we make things more provocative
than they should be or we disseminate
things that we know are probably not
true but we know it'll get reaction from
people.
>> Well, another thing that happened is
that now the uh 14-year-old teenager in
their basement has the same platform as
the Harvard professor.
>> Yeah.
>> There now everyone is equal. You can't
really tell like there's in the past it
used to be, you know,
>> gatekeepers.
>> Yeah. Then there there was this you
would look to people that had studied a
subject for years to find out what do
they think about it. But now that's
largely diminished. Now it's it's
everyone is is even.
>> I guess the push back on that though is
now that 14-year-old has access to all
the world's information and you know can
do with that something that they never
would have been empowered to do before.
And if they have a great idea then they
have more reach than they ever would
have had before. There's nobody that
they have to ask permission and and so
you have this dual you know this
negative thing and also this positive
thing.
>> It's like fire.
>> Very powerful.
>> Yeah definitely. How would you talk to
kids about mental toughness? Like I was
talking to my kids about interviewing
you and you know one of their questions
was like what would he say to a group of
12 to 14 year olds about developing
mental toughness? Like how can we go
about doing that because you know we're
so coddled.
>> You know I think about what Simon Simon
Senn said once that if you're violinist
and you're trying to play the violin
perfectly and you have this concert it's
going to be very stressful because you
could make a mistake. But if you think
to yourself, I love playing the violin.
I'm going to share what I love with the
audience. Then you've got a chance to
have a great concert.
And so the 12 to 14year-old has grown up
in a culture that is obsessed with
transactions, success, followers. And so
it's a very surface level transactional
culture that they've grown up in. And so
to help them understand about sacrifice
and love and creating relationships is
the most powerful way that you can be
successful and have mental toughness at
the same time is is crucial.
>> What's the process if I'm an athlete, I
come to you or I come to you and I'm
shamed? Like what's that first
conversation like? Jim, you know, I've
been successful but something doesn't
feel right, doesn't feel sustainable.
>> What does that first conversation sort
of look like?
>> I want to know um what you really want.
like why did you why did you contact me?
What is it that you really want um
besides being world number one or
whatever it is? I want to know how you
want to feel in your life and how you
don't want to feel. If we work together,
I'm going to help you learn principles
and tools and develop habits of thought
and action and how to get that feeling
more often. What adds to it? What takes
away from it? Talk about your life for a
second. How do you want to feel in your
life? If we just had a couple
adjectives, for example,
>> fulfilled.
>> Okay.
>> Uh contributing.
>> And what about the mind or body? What
does that like? Do you like clutter up
there or stress or tightness or what
what do you like the mind and body to
feel?
>> I don't know. I don't think I've ever
really thought about that, right? And
you know, I think what do I want? I want
peace. I want
>> Okay.
>> You know, I want to be driven think I
want to be driven more by clean fuel.
And yet just tying that back, it's like
the dirty fuel has been very effective.
>> Yeah. And so that's such a crucial thing
to understand is that the that quote
right there, the dirty fuel has been
very effective. Fear can accomplish a
lot. So can anger. You can that can
really drive people. But the long-term
effect is something that a lot of people
don't want. For example, losing inner
peace and joy.
>> Yeah.
>> I don't tell people what to do. I try
never to tell people what to do. I just
want to help them clarify what they want
most. And and this is a good example is
is people that are very talented. They
get caught up in what I call this
competitor's trap. It's just I'm going
to be more productive because every time
I achieve something, I'm getting that
sort of love from like my kids are
excited, my family, my co-workers, the
world, they're like, "Oh, great job." I
get the cheers. And that's the trap is
that we we aren't able to think deeper
about our lives. Like on my rocking
chair or on my deathbed, what's going to
be the most important thing? And and
what happens to a lot of parents is they
got caught up in the the illusion that I
just want to provide resources for my
kids like
>> a nice house and trips to Europe or
whatever it is so they can do whatever
they want with their life. That's a very
common end like what do you really want
for them? Well, I just want them to do
whatever they want. I just want them to
be happy. And so when they parent tells
me that I say well if you want them to
be happy I could set up a program. It's
kind of expensive, but every Friday I'll
call your kid and tell him a joke at
three o'clock. Is that what you want
most for them? A little laugh
>> once a week? No. Of course, you want
something much deeper, right? And so I
what I tell parents is that if you want
your kids to say you want your kids to
live um a life with amazing experiences
and deep enriching relationships or
learning and growing and making a
difference in the world, something like
that. Well, the number one thing is for
you to live that. and for you to live
that. Now, we've got a whole bunch of
things that need to happen. We need to
clarify your life purpose. The only way
you're going to clarify your life
purpose and and live that purpose is we
need to get rid of what's not you. So,
we got to simplify your life and down to
that one sentence, that one purpose for
your life. Get rid of what's not you.
And everything that you do is going to
move towards that. And in that life
purpose, the way we think about it is we
start with how do you want to feel in
your life? What do you value most? Who
do you value most? Who do you want to
become? Like for me, and I think for
many many people now, especially
teenagers, the role models are the
people that have the most transactional
success, hit the most home runs, got the
most followers, make the most money,
that sort of thing. But obviously, the
problem with that is that real success,
if you're if you have all that outward
success, but your inside is is filled
with with anxiety and and stress, it's
not super successful, is it? I've met,
you know, through this podcast and just
through life have been fortunate in a
lot of ways to meet what other people
would consider exceptional people or
exceptional results. And by any monetary
standard, it's true. But there's a lot
of them that aren't just happy or
content, I guess, is the but I often
imagine, well, if they were content,
maybe they wouldn't be as driven and
maybe the world wouldn't sort of push
forward as
>> This is a great This is so I hear this a
lot. This is a really great uh idea.
Thank you. if I'm content, I'm going to
lose out on my say productivity. I'm I'm
not going to be as motivated. And so
what I've shared with that with
proathletes is that so what you're
telling me is that um if we take away
your anxiety, the anxiety that you have,
sorry that I don't like to say someone's
personal anxiety, take away the anxious
feelings that you've had. You say that
now you've got all this talent and
without the anxious feelings, you're
just going to sit on the couch and and
not do anything. I don't think that's
going to happen. But the other part of
it is this obsession with happiness and
achievement. So say you win 23 Olympic
gold medals or you become a billionaire.
What's the good?
>> If you won 23 Olympic gold medals like
you've done that every day for years. So
like the good must be the process I
would assume for that. And that you know
the billionaire I don't know like you
can do a lot with that money for the
world.
So if we look at the 23 gold medals,
it's very wisely said to focus on the
process, not the result. No, that's
that's what inner excellence is. What is
that process and what is it that we
really want? What are we trying to do
with it? For me, it's the process of
developing yourself to have to walk in
love not fear to pursue wisdom above all
else to have more courage. It's not
about making money. Is making a billion
dollars good for you? it may be the
worst thing for you because what happens
um I think it's pretty well documented
that when people get more money that
they become more of who they were if you
were self-centered you're going to
become more self-centered
cuz money is powerful
>> I think it also changes you you know
knowing a lot of incredibly wealthy
people one thing that I notice that's
really interesting is their social
circles get smaller and smaller and
smaller and I think in part like um
people start asking you for
And then you create this sort of like
seed of distrust almost. But there they
might start out normal things like you
and I would ask you for a favor. Hey,
you know, my brother's looking for a job
or something. Do you have anything? But
when you do that with people who are who
are wealthy, it's sort of like, oh god,
like everybody just wants something from
me. And there's nobody in my life who
just doesn't want something from me and
doesn't or accepts me for who who I am
as a person.
>> You know, I've seen that. I'd tell you a
funny story about yesterday. I'm driving
behind this this um vehicle and it said
stay 50 feet back. It was a correctional
facility vehicle, I guess. So, I'm I'm
assuming that there's inmates in the
vehicle sometimes. I'm guessing that
it's to keep you safe from these
criminals. That's that's my guess. And I
was thinking about that. I was like,
yeah, that's how society is. It's like
we've got the bad people. We got to keep
them away from us good people. Mhm.
>> And I thought, well, that's kind of like
the opposite of interex and what I'm
trying to do with my life is I want to
go be with people that need it the most
and who needs it more than a criminal.
That's how you make a difference in the
world. That's how you live the most
meaningful, fulfilling life is you make
a difference in the lives of people who
need it the most. I'm not saying that I
don't need I need it more than anybody,
but I share what I'm learning and try
and serve others who also need it.
>> Yeah, I appreciate that. I mean I I
share everything to you publicly to
varying degrees. I want to talk about
guild for a second. You know, coming
back to me and like I think this applies
to many people. So I'll use myself as an
example, but I think it's relevant to
the hundreds of thousands of people
listening to this, which is I prioritize
uh my kids and work. That doesn't leave
a lot of time for other things. And
that's a choice, a conscious choice. And
I'm okay, I think, by and large with
that choice. I tell myself anyway, my
inner monologue is like, I can always be
ambitious later after the kids move out
sort of thing. But it causes a lot of
guilt when I say no to things or when
people invite me to things. And if I do
go, I'm going because I should go, not
because I want to go.
>> So, you said the kids in work is kind of
your priority. We talked about this a
little bit before. It's a hard question.
Sometimes the questions I ask are a
little bit hard, but what do you want
most for your kids?
>> Independence, contributing members of
society. I don't believe in the pursuit
of happiness. I think, you know, they
need to find their own path for
themselves. To the extent that I have
influence as a parent and I don't think
we have as much influence at some points
as we think we do, I want them to be
contributing members of society, however
that looks
uh for them. But that is generally a
positive outcome.
>> Okay. So say for example they become an
accountant, pay their taxes and they're
able to survive on their own independent
contribute. Is that the highest
aspiration for them?
>> Not the highest but I mean that that's
like the the floor you know
>> force for them.
>> I want them to just be content with life
whatever that means for them because how
am I going to push on them my version of
like what happiness looks like? Like
that's not I don't think about it that I
asked you this question because you
mentioned guilt.
>> The guilt is not from the parenting
though. The guilt is social functions or
events or birthday parties.
>> What I think what you're saying is that
you work really hard to provide for your
family and you want the best for them
and sometimes you feel guilty because
some when you do that you have to say no
to a lot of things
>> and so that causes some guilt. Did I get
that right?
>> Yeah. you know, at the end of a day of
taking care of two kids and working a
long day, sometimes I just don't have I
have no energy to give to other people.
>> Right. Right. That makes sense. This is
a very very common thing and I I alluded
to it a little bit earlier that working
really long hours to provide for your
kids. And I think what happens to people
is that they in their mind is the best
thing I can do for my kids is provide
them resources, spend time with them,
and then give them the chance to do
whatever they want. And I think that's
amazing, but it's a very low bar. I
think there's a much higher bar that
that uh would be even more powerful and
that would be to teach them how to walk
in love not fear. Teach them how to seek
wisdom above all else. And I define
wisdom as an expansive vision that that
has unobscured views of beauty and
connections and possibilities and even
on a deeper level to know who God is and
therefore who you are, what he's doing
in the world and and how you can join
in. So wisdom is very different than
knowledge. To me, knowledge is how to
take apart a lawn mower or how this
speaker works. It's great, but it's
temporary. It's not eternal. Whereas,
wisdom is things that are going to last
forever. And so, it's just a deeper look
into life. And I think that's the best
thing a parent can do is help them learn
wisdom and courage and things like that
much more so than the the low bar. Um,
which is I don't want to feel like I'm
picking up.
>> Oh, no. No. Please do. Yeah.
>> Because I I want
>> I won't feel like you're picking up.
We're just doing this in front of like
hundreds of thousands of people. said
it's all good.
>> Well, my goal is is to love you as best
as I can and everyone that's listening.
And it's it's really how can we share
the best possible life with our kids.
That's that's what you want, right? And
and to me, that best possible life has
has very um important things in it. Like
understanding that the best possible
life has one foot in joy and one foot in
suffering.
>> Go deeper on that.
>> It's a hard thing for parents because
parents are like, I just want my kids to
be happy. I mean, I've got eight nieces
and nephews and I love them so much. I
want the best for them. But there's this
kind of running joke is and now they're
all they're aged now uh six to 21 I
think. And so as they're growing I'm
hopefully trying to teach them some
things and and one of the kind of the
one running jokes is is that loving to
give candy to a kid because they love
candy my nephews. And so we have the
short-term good thing which is they have
good feelings but long-term it's not
good for them, not healthy, right? And
so that's kind of the battle that every
parent faces is how much time do I need
to take off of my work and stop and
think about my life so I can think about
meaningful things that I can share with
the kids and how much time do I just
well that's that's hard to do. Like
where do I even start? Do I got to go to
the desert like Jim did? I've got to
work tomorrow. So but the first thing is
you don't have to work tomorrow. You're
just, you know, you might lose your job,
but you don't have to go to work
tomorrow. That's your conscious choice.
That's important to understand. I had PJ
tour player tell me when I first
started, he said, "Sometimes I just want
to walk off the course and I don't want
to come back, but I can't do that." I
said, "You can't." I think it's really
important for you to know that you can
do that. You have choices. Every day
you're making choices. And what I want
you to do next time you get that
feeling, I want you to think it through.
Like, I really want to quit right now. I
want to walk off the course. And so,
think, okay, well, let's do that. But
before we do it, let's think about
what's going to happen. Okay, I'm going
to tell my caddy. Pack it up. We're
leaving. You're going to go to the tent.
Say you're withdrawing. And then you
fill out the form. You withdraw. You
throw the clubs in the trunk, slam the
trunk, you go to Chipotle, you sit
there, and you talk to your your cat in
Chipotle. So, picture that in an hour.
Is that what you want to do? If that's
what you want to do, then go do it. But
as you think it through, I think what's
probably going to happen is you're going
to think, "Okay, do I want to sit in
Chipotle with my caddy?" in the back of
your mind, you know, well, even if I'm
hating this, there might be something I
could work on to get better, which is
the essence of inner excellence is to
learn and grow every day. If you're if
you're out of it, you don't have a
chance to win, and you know you're going
to miss the cut. Well, now you've got a
great opportunity. You can work on that
one that one uh big draw that you wanted
to work on. You can work on that that uh
chip that was really tough. You can
intentionally hit it to a really tough
part of the course to to work on
something instead of just like, "Oh,
this sucks. My day is done. Why do I
even keep playing? This is kind of like
metaphor for life.
>> It sounds like a lot of what we're doing
is changing the area of focus from our
mind. And I'll give you an example. I
was talking with Emily Baladis. She's a
doctor. And one of the things that stuck
with me about this conversation
was she talked about how runners who are
running a marathon or athletes who are
doing any sort of sport and they hit a
wall while they're in the competition.
and what do you do when you hit this
wall? And she said the the world's best
performers, like you know, in her
research where they change the area of
focus. Like if you're halfway through a
marathon, your legs start hurting and
you're focused on the finish line, like
you're never going to make it. But if
you focus on the stop sign that's 50 m
in front of you or the red light that
you can see or the next visible and then
you you focus on the next thing once you
achieve that, you'll finish the race and
you'll do it in great time. So, what
you're really doing is you're shortening
the distance between what you want,
which is to finish the marathon, and
then where you're looking to achieve.
And I I think you had an example in your
book about a swimmer who did this in the
cold water.
>> That's right. Yeah.
>> Tell me about that.
>> Yeah. Lewis Gordon Pew, he swam a
kilometer at the North Pole and just a
speedo, which most people said would
would be impossible. They'd die. And he
didn't die. One thing about the cold, I
think, is very similar to the running
when you're really hurting. The problem
with the cold is the mind that's
thinking of the future. If you're super
super cold, but if I asked you, can you
last one more second and then we're
going to put you in a a hot tub or a
sauna? What would most people say? Or
even five more seconds. Okay, there's a
sauna right there. Can you go five more
seconds? I think most people would say
yes. Right? It's the fear of, oh, how
long is this going to last? I don't it's
it's this projection and the expectation
and how all those circumstances do we
look at the past and the pain that we've
had and project to the future and what's
going to happen that's the problem but
when we can be in this moment and
embrace whatever pain and challenge we
have in this moment right just right now
and then take the next step that that's
the power that she was sharing you know
so what Lewis Gordon Q did was his
performance coach said you're never
going to make it if you just think I'm
going to swim one kilometer we've got to
break this down into smaller steps. And
so they had a flag every 100 meters that
represented a group of people on his
team. Then his coach said, "I don't want
you to think about anything except for
that flag. You just got to get to the
next flag. Just the next flag."
>> I think there's a lot about life that
that enables us to continue going
forward. But I want to tie it back to
what you said. It also enables us to
just got to work on this chip shot and
to be present in that moment more than
we're, you know, in our head. we're fast
forwarding to the future of the finish
line, the the milestone that's in the
distance. And if that gap is too large,
it can it can prevent us from starting
things that we don't want to start. It
can prevent us from finishing things
that we have started. You know, I did
this with my kids last year. We they
wanted to run this uh 5 km race with the
school they have to. And so we're
training in the mornings and you know,
you can see they want to give up. And
I'm like, your mind gives up before your
body, long before your body. this is a
mental toughness thing. This isn't a
physical like you're going to collapse
thing and they hated that. But it pushed
them at the same time to sort of go
beyond.
>> One of the things that you said that's
so powerful is is the the challenge with
with not wanting to start things. This
is the challenge that we all face. The
main issue with that is is that your
first step is too big.
>> Yeah.
>> We we need to make that make that next
step smaller. And James Clear talks
about this in Atomic Habits that great
book. If you want to start running, can
you put your shoes, your running shoes
by the door? That's the first step. Can
you just do that?
>> Yeah.
>> And the next day, can you just put them
on and walk around the house and take
these very small steps? It's like uh
Teddy Scotch, Scotty Sheffller's um
wonderful caddy,
>> the world number one. He's also a coach
and and he says, "What I try to do with
most of my clients is help them lower
their expectations to what they know
they can do." It's kind of like how can
I help them be present? Mhm.
>> Can you if you're putting um can you hit
this on the center of the club face?
>> I love that a lot. I think that's super
powerful. Um the habit thing is is
interesting to me. James is a good
friend.
I have this idea of like things are hard
when they're choices, but they're not
when they're rules. And so one of the
things is for me is like I want to work
out every day. I want to be healthy.
That that enables the foundation of all
the other things that I do. if I don't
do that. But I hate working out. I'm not
one of those people who shows up at the
gym and they're like super happy.
There's some guy at the treadmill this
morning at the gym. He's like smiling.
I'm like, who are these people? Like,
what? It's 500 a.m. What is in your
coffee? Like, this is insane. I want
whatever you're having, but I definitely
do not share it. And so, I just created
this rule, and I got it from Daniel
Conman. Not the workout rule, but
creating rules for ourselves. And I work
out every day. So duration or scope can
change, but there's not a choice about
whether I work out. It's
>> like a mantra you have.
>> Yeah. It's like a mantra.
>> Very powerful.
>> And those seem very powerful. And this
ties into where I was going with this is
your you have mantras
>> and one of them I found really powerful
which is but I also have a question
about you say give 100% of what's
available.
>> Yeah. So if you have 40% today, you
didn't sleep well, you were up late last
night, you had maybe too many drinks
with your friends, whatever, you give
100% of whatever that 40% is, the
question that comes to my mind
immediately when I hear that is like I
have relief. That's my first feeling.
It's like, h finally, like somebody
understands me. On the other hand, it's
like that's an excuse. This morning I
drove here from central New Jersey and
uh the GPS said it was going to take
under two hours and it was all close to
four hours and through rush hour traffic
into Manhattan and I've been working on
a book and um not a ton of sleep lately
and so the thoughts on the way here the
one I was really working hard and not
getting caught up in my circumstance of
rush hour traffic for 4 hours. Um, but
the thought of what if I'm forgetful or
it doesn't go well and and I don't um
share some good ideas and uh I was in
the bathroom as soon as I got here and
then I thought about that idea of of
goal number one. Give the best of what
you have.
>> And I thought, you know, today could be
today's like a 30 or 40% day. I don't
have a lot to give, but I'm going to
give the best of what I have. And that
was very helpful to me as I just before
I walked into this room. It's empowering
in a way. And then there's this side of
me that on the other side like the two
sides of my brain if you will like
fighting about this this um mantra and
I'm like you know one side is like yes
this is perfect and the other side is
like well if you do that like two or
three days in a row like what are you
what is that? Who are you like why would
that be okay? And so I think and well
there are sometimes some weeks, some
months, some seasons where it's going to
be like that. And I think it's super
important to know. But I think about
your personality. I think it reminds me
of people that are um talented and
driven and have you called it guilt.
Whether it's guilt or some other that
part of their mind says you're slacking.
>> Like yeah, but that's
>> it's constant.
>> And so I I find it very common like
people that are that are talented.
Here's an example of what happened to
me. Um, something that's a little bit
different, but I thought was I found
very intriguing. I went on this this
boat ride, sailboat with I mentioned it
earlier. I get on the boat. Before I get
on the boat, I I was wearing an aura
ring, a Whoop, and a bio strap.
>> Three things every night to bed to track
my physiology and share it with my
clients and do some research. And so,
um, I've had a very perfectionist
personality, very detail- oriented, and
just feeling like I just want to be the
best. And, um, if I need something on
Amazon, just a couple swipes, okay, it's
coming tomorrow. Well, get on the boat.
I, as soon as we got on the boat, he
said, "We're not going to see
civilization for two weeks." And I was
like, "Okay." He grew up on a farm. He
had like one article of clothing. I had
a suitcase. I mean, I was in Tahiti for
a month, but I'm watching him. We're
looking in the cupboards of food and
there's some bread, but it had mold on
it. And he's like, "Oh, no, no, just
pull off the mold." You know, just that
that's fine. It's fine. He's eating it
and I'm horrified. And then food's
falling on the He grew up on a farm.
Food's on the floor. Oh, it's okay. You
know, just eating it. And after a while,
I'm watching him like one article of
clothing. And I'm like,
>> his life is a lot freer than mine,
>> lot more relaxed. I've got to have
things a certain way. I can't eat food
off the floor. I'm not going to
>> pick off the mold. And uh and I and I
was realized like if I I was very
limiting my my life with that with that
um perfectionism.
>> So since that trip, thanks to Chris,
I've given myself a lot more freedom.
Now I don't feel I I've noticed that
limitation that I thought was a was um
just a positive this this high bar that
I this standard and I've realized it was
really limiting my freedom.
>> What are your other daily mantras? You
know, one of the the reminder that I've
had for years on my phone that's been
the most powerful for me is God is with
you, Jim.
>> Why is that powerful for you?
>> Well, it's like when I shared when this
whole thing went down and everything um
happened that first week in um January,
at first it was overwhelming and then I
realized what is the best thing about
this? The best thing is that is that I
get to go into Philadelphia and work
with my hero Shane Clareborn, this
Christian activist who moved in with the
poor 25, 30 years ago. and do these
amazing things for with with amazing
people in Kensington. That's the most
the best part about this. It's not any
um other transaction that I'm going to
get.
>> Does it make you feel less alone?
>> Does what make me feel less alone?
>> If God is with you?
>> Yeah. This isn't for Jim Murphy to be
successful. The first week all the media
was like Jim Murphy doing this. Look at
this author. Whatever. And I was like,
first I was like, why do people keep
talking about me? I'm nobody. I I'm
insignificant. It's the message selfless
is fearless. Then I kind of realized,
oh, I guess that's the American dream to
be rich and famous. I mean, it's an
illusion that it's the best life, but
that's what everybody wants. What I want
people to learn is that the best life is
not a life with good circumstances. The
best life is a life where you feel fully
alive. What happens is most people,
especially in Western culture, they're
they're just constantly trying to get
better and better circumstances for
themselves and their kids to make life
easier. That's what most people do,
isn't it? And that's the great illusion.
An easier life is not the best life.
>> I mean, to push back on that just for a
second because my mind just naturally
goes into yes and no again. Yes. I
there's a part of me that agrees with
that. There's a part of me that looks at
these cameras here and is like these
would not exist without people pursuing
a dream and ambition. Yeah. and doing
that perhaps at the cost of social
relationships, at the cost of being a
parent, at the cost of being the best
partner they could be.
>> For sure.
>> And I don't advocate for those things
for anybody unconsciously.
>> However, consciously, they're the reason
we have medicine. They're the reason
like society
>> people have sacrificed.
>> Yeah. people have or you know I look at
what happened where I used to work post
911 is like people worked 16 hours a day
7 days a week for 7 years and in that
process what they were doing was
sacrificing for something larger than
themselves they felt a part of something
and it wasn't religion or God it was but
there was meaning and purpose to it and
the byproduct of that was sacrificing
being a parent sacrificing the relation
relationships with other people in order
to achieve that, in order to push that
forward. And so I have these like
dueling sets to my mind where on
individual level I'm like, you're 100%
correct, but on a societal level, I
don't know if that's the best outcome
for society.
But I do think on an individual level,
it's probably the best outcome for
individuals.
>> Okay, let's look at the um the best
possible life has one foot in joy and
one foot in suffering. Mhm.
>> First of all, this is not how I would
prefer it. I'm not a fan of suffering.
What I'm saying is that I believe that
this is just how the universe works.
>> It's not something I'm advocating for.
I'm just explaining what I found. Um,
and first just the basic one is is um
physical fitness you're talking about.
If you want to build stronger muscles,
you have to break them down. This just
is how the universe works. You you can't
do it sitting on the couch. You have to
you have to make the muscles sacrifice
and suffer to get them bigger. That's
just how it works. And it's the same
thing with wisdom and courage. You can't
gain courage by constantly uh just
making yourself more more and more
comfortable. There's this quote um I
can't remember who it was that that I
loved. I think it was a guy named Gary
Brook, but the quote is aging is the
aggressive pursuit of comfort.
>> Oh, interesting.
>> So that if you want wisdom, then you
have to go through things. You need that
jacket that's too big, two sizes too
big. You have to have trouble. You have
to have adversity in your life. There's
no way to You can't just read about it
on the couch.
>> Why do you think we think about training
our bodies, but we rarely think about
training our mind? And it doesn't matter
if you're an athlete or knowledge worker
or, you know, we think, you know, food,
nutrition in, we think body, uh,
training muscles, but we rarely think
about
>> well, we're led around by our eyes. We
live uh this um transactional life, this
third world results and circumstances.
So if I put in this effort, I can see
what happens. But if I gain wisdom, I
can't see that with my eyes very easy.
If I'm uh gain become a more loving
person, that's hard to see with my eyes.
But if I make more money, get a nicer
house, etc., I can see that. And that's
that that surface level transactional
world that we live in that that we get
sucked into.
>> That's a really good point. We always
end these interviews with the same
question. I'm so curious what your
answer is going to be, which is what is
success for you
>> right now? There's so much um pain in
the world, suffering and starvation and
and um in in America, so much division
and and need. So I think of success for
me and in two things. One is um to
become the person that I was created to
become to live my purpose to to share
God's love, wisdom, and courage with the
world. And then in doing that to provide
uh um tangible help to people that are
hungry and and imprisoned and and uh
refugees and widows and orphans to help
them.
>> That's a great answer. Thank you so much
for taking the time today.
>> You know, I was not expecting such
amazing questions. Uh thank you.